docs/plots/index.rst, before:

*************
Visualisation
*************

.. todo::

   Describe how to use DS9. See the "Image Display" section below.
   The example needs documentation and the data probably needs
   cleaning up to make it "nicer".

Overview
========

Sherpa has support for different plot backends, at present limited
to
:term:`matplotlib` and
:term:`ChIPS`. Interactive visualizations of images is
provided by
:term:`DS9` - an Astronomical image viewer - if installed, whilst
there is limited support for visualizing two-dimensional data sets
with matplotlib. The classes described in this document do not
need to be used, since the data can be plotted directly, but
they do provide some conveniences.

The basic approach to creating a visualization using these classes is:

 - create an instance of the relevant class (e.g.
   :py:class:`~sherpa.plot.DataPlot`);
 - send it the necessary data with the ``prepare()`` method (optional);
 - perform any necessary calculation with the ``calc()`` method (optional);
 - and plot the data with the
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Plot.plot` or
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Contour.contour`
   methods (or the 
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Plot.overplot`,
   and
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Contour.overcontour` variants).
   
.. note::

   The `sherpa.plot` module also includes error-estimation
   routines, such as the `IntervalProjection` class. This is mixing
   analysis with visualization, which may not be ideal.

Image Display
-------------

There are also routines for image display, using the
:term:`DS9` image viewer for interactive display. How are
these used from the object API?

Example
=======

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> edges = np.asarray([-10, -5, 5, 12, 17, 20, 30, 56, 60])
    >>> y = np.asarray([28, 62, 17, 4, 2, 4, 55, 125])
   
    >>> from sherpa.data import Data1DInt
    >>> d = Data1DInt('example histogram', edges[:-1], edges[1:], y)

    >>> from sherpa.plot import DataPlot
    >>> dplot = DataPlot()
    >>> dplot.prepare(d)
    >>> dplot.plot()

.. image:: ../_static/plots/dataplot_histogram.png

Some text.

    >>> from sherpa.plot import Histogram
    >>> hplot = Histogram()
    >>> hplot.overplot(d.xlo, d.xhi, d.y)

.. image:: ../_static/plots/dataplot_histogram_overplot.png

Some more text.

    >>> from sherpa.models.basic import Const1D, Gauss1D
    >>> mdl = Const1D('base') - Gauss1D('line')
    >>> for p, v in zip(mdl.pars, [10, 25, 22, 10]):
    ...     p.val = v
   
    >>> from sherpa.plot import ModelPlot
    >>> mplot = ModelPlot()
    >>> mplot.prepare(d, mdl)
    >>> mplot.plot()
    >>> dplot.overplot()

.. image:: ../_static/plots/modelplot_histogram_overplot.png

Blah.

    >>> from sherpa.optmethods import NelderMead
    >>> from sherpa.stats import Cash
    >>> from sherpa.fit import Fit
    >>> f = Fit(d, mdl, stat=Cash(), method=NelderMead())
    >>> f.fit()

    >>> from sherpa.plot import IntervalProjection
    >>> iproj = IntervalProjection()
    >>> iproj.calc(f, mdl.pars[2])
    WARNING: hard minimum hit for parameter base.c0
    WARNING: hard maximum hit for parameter base.c0
    WARNING: hard minimum hit for parameter line.fwhm
    WARNING: hard maximum hit for parameter line.fwhm
    WARNING: hard minimum hit for parameter line.ampl
    WARNING: hard maximum hit for parameter line.ampl
    >>> iproj.plot()

Hmmmm. Not good results. Need to reevaluate the data beng used here.

Reference/API
=============

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   plot
   astroplot

Commit message:

Docs: remove mention of ChIPS from the sphinx documentation
I do not think we need to add a section on "removed" functionality
which describes the ChIPS plotting backend here.

docs/plots/index.rst, after:

*************
Visualisation
*************

.. todo::

   Describe how to use DS9. See the "Image Display" section below.
   The example needs documentation and the data probably needs
   cleaning up to make it "nicer".

Overview
========

Sherpa has support for different plot backends, although
at present there is only one, which uses the
:term:`matplotlib` package.
Interactive visualizations of images is provided by
:term:`DS9` - an Astronomical image viewer - if installed, whilst
there is limited support for visualizing two-dimensional data sets
with matplotlib. The classes described in this document do not
need to be used, since the data can be plotted directly, but
they do provide some conveniences.

The basic approach to creating a visualization using these classes is:

 - create an instance of the relevant class (e.g.
   :py:class:`~sherpa.plot.DataPlot`);
 - send it the necessary data with the ``prepare()`` method (optional);
 - perform any necessary calculation with the ``calc()`` method (optional);
 - and plot the data with the
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Plot.plot` or
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Contour.contour`
   methods (or the 
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Plot.overplot`,
   and
   :py:meth:`~sherpa.plot.Contour.overcontour` variants).
   
.. note::

   The `sherpa.plot` module also includes error-estimation
   routines, such as the `IntervalProjection` class. This is mixing
   analysis with visualization, which may not be ideal.

Image Display
-------------

There are also routines for image display, using the
:term:`DS9` image viewer for interactive display. How are
these used from the object API?

Example
=======

    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> edges = np.asarray([-10, -5, 5, 12, 17, 20, 30, 56, 60])
    >>> y = np.asarray([28, 62, 17, 4, 2, 4, 55, 125])
   
    >>> from sherpa.data import Data1DInt
    >>> d = Data1DInt('example histogram', edges[:-1], edges[1:], y)

    >>> from sherpa.plot import DataPlot
    >>> dplot = DataPlot()
    >>> dplot.prepare(d)
    >>> dplot.plot()

.. image:: ../_static/plots/dataplot_histogram.png

Some text.

    >>> from sherpa.plot import Histogram
    >>> hplot = Histogram()
    >>> hplot.overplot(d.xlo, d.xhi, d.y)

.. image:: ../_static/plots/dataplot_histogram_overplot.png

Some more text.

    >>> from sherpa.models.basic import Const1D, Gauss1D
    >>> mdl = Const1D('base') - Gauss1D('line')
    >>> for p, v in zip(mdl.pars, [10, 25, 22, 10]):
    ...     p.val = v
   
    >>> from sherpa.plot import ModelPlot
    >>> mplot = ModelPlot()
    >>> mplot.prepare(d, mdl)
    >>> mplot.plot()
    >>> dplot.overplot()

.. image:: ../_static/plots/modelplot_histogram_overplot.png

Blah.

    >>> from sherpa.optmethods import NelderMead
    >>> from sherpa.stats import Cash
    >>> from sherpa.fit import Fit
    >>> f = Fit(d, mdl, stat=Cash(), method=NelderMead())
    >>> f.fit()

    >>> from sherpa.plot import IntervalProjection
    >>> iproj = IntervalProjection()
    >>> iproj.calc(f, mdl.pars[2])
    WARNING: hard minimum hit for parameter base.c0
    WARNING: hard maximum hit for parameter base.c0
    WARNING: hard minimum hit for parameter line.fwhm
    WARNING: hard maximum hit for parameter line.fwhm
    WARNING: hard minimum hit for parameter line.ampl
    WARNING: hard maximum hit for parameter line.ampl
    >>> iproj.plot()

Hmmmm. Not good results. Need to reevaluate the data beng used here.

Reference/API
=============

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   plot
   astroplot
