docs/index.rst, before:


.. hide the title (based on astropy)
.. raw:: html

    <style media="screen" type="text/css">h1 { display: none; }</style>
   
Welcome to Sherpa's documentation
=================================

.. image:: _static/sherpa_logo.png
    :width: 350px
    :height: 132px
    :target: http://cxc.harvard.edu/contrib/sherpa/

Welcome to the Sherpa documentation.
`Sherpa <http://cxc.harvard.edu/contrib/sherpa/>`_
is a Python package for
modeling and fitting data. It was originally developed by the
`Chandra X-ray Center <http://cxc.harvard.edu/>`_ for use in
`analysing X-ray data (both spectral and imaging)
<http://cxc.harvard.edu/sherpa>`_
from the  Chandra X-ray telescope, but it is designed to be a
general-purpose package, which can be enhanced with domain-specific
tasks (such as X-ray Astronomy).
Sherpa contains an expressive and powerful
modeling language, coupled with a
range of statistics and robust optimisers.

Sherpa is released under the
`GNU General Public License v3.0
<https://github.com/sherpa/sherpa/blob/master/LICENSE>`_,
and is compatible with Python versions 3.5, 3.6, and 3.7.
Information on recent releases and citation information for
Sherpa is available using the Digital Object Identifier (DOI) 
`10.5281/zenodo.593753 <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.593753>`_.

The last version of Sherpa compatible with Python 2.7 was the
`4.11.1 release <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3358134>`_.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Introduction
   :name: intro

   install
   quick
   ciao

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: User Documentation
   :name: user_docs

   data/index
   models/index
   evaluation/index
   model_classes/index
   statistics/index
   optimisers/index
   fit/index
   plots/index
   mcmc/index
   overview/utilities

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Worked Examples
   :name: worked_examples

   examples/simple_interpolation
   examples/simple_user_model

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: An interactive application
   :name: ui

   ui/index

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Getting Help
   :name: help_docs

   bugs
   development
   indices
      
At present there is no developer mailing list for Sherpa.

Commit message:

Docs: note limited testing with Python 3.8
I have not added 3.8 to the supported badges on the README.

docs/index.rst, after:


.. hide the title (based on astropy)
.. raw:: html

    <style media="screen" type="text/css">h1 { display: none; }</style>
   
Welcome to Sherpa's documentation
=================================

.. image:: _static/sherpa_logo.png
    :width: 350px
    :height: 132px
    :target: http://cxc.harvard.edu/contrib/sherpa/

Welcome to the Sherpa documentation.
`Sherpa <http://cxc.harvard.edu/contrib/sherpa/>`_
is a Python package for
modeling and fitting data. It was originally developed by the
`Chandra X-ray Center <http://cxc.harvard.edu/>`_ for use in
`analysing X-ray data (both spectral and imaging)
<http://cxc.harvard.edu/sherpa>`_
from the  Chandra X-ray telescope, but it is designed to be a
general-purpose package, which can be enhanced with domain-specific
tasks (such as X-ray Astronomy).
Sherpa contains an expressive and powerful
modeling language, coupled with a
range of statistics and robust optimisers.

Sherpa is released under the
`GNU General Public License v3.0
<https://github.com/sherpa/sherpa/blob/master/LICENSE>`_,
and is compatible with Python versions 3.5, 3.6, and 3.7.
It is expected that it will work with Python 3.8 but testing has been
limited.
Information on recent releases and citation information for
Sherpa is available using the Digital Object Identifier (DOI) 
`10.5281/zenodo.593753 <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.593753>`_.

The last version of Sherpa compatible with Python 2.7 was the
`4.11.1 release <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3358134>`_.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Introduction
   :name: intro

   install
   quick
   ciao

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: User Documentation
   :name: user_docs

   data/index
   models/index
   evaluation/index
   model_classes/index
   statistics/index
   optimisers/index
   fit/index
   plots/index
   mcmc/index
   overview/utilities

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Worked Examples
   :name: worked_examples

   examples/simple_interpolation
   examples/simple_user_model

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: An interactive application
   :name: ui

   ui/index

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: Getting Help
   :name: help_docs

   bugs
   development
   indices
      
At present there is no developer mailing list for Sherpa.
